Dune begins on the planet Caladan, which is ruled by Duke Leto of the House of Atreides. The House of 
Atreides is one of the families that rules over the planets and planetary systems of the universe. Duke 
Leto’s son, Paul, is in bed when his mother, Jessica, and Reverend Mother Mohiam check in on him. The old 
reverend mother mutters that Paul may be the Kwisatz Haderach, the one who brings about important changes 
in the universe. Reverend Mother Mohiam says that the next day, Paul will meet her gom jabbar, an instrument 
that poisons and kills instantly, unless he passes her test. To test whether Paul is human, the Reverend 
Mother Mohiam has him put his hand into a small box. The box brings great pain to Paul, but he knows that 
if he moves, the Reverend Mother Mohiam will stab him with the gom jabbar. He passes Mohiam’s test, which 
means he is a human being and not an animal. He then discovers that Jessica took the same test long ago; the 
reverend mother was her teacher at the Bene Gesserit school. The two women reveal to Paul that something 
terrible will soon happen to the House of Atreides and that his father will die. The two women tell Paul 
that the duke’s death will happen soon after the Atreides move to Arrakis, the desert planet, now ruled by 
the Atreides’s mortal enemies, the Harkonnens.

On another planet, the fat Baron Harkonnen reveals his plot to his nephew Feyd-Rautha and his servant, Piter, 
a Mentat, a person who thinks using logic and no emotions. The baron has maneuvered the emperor, the leader 
of the universe, into giving the planet Arrakis to the Atreides in exchange for the planet Caladan. Though 
Arrakis is a desert planet and Caladan a lush one, this trade does not seem good for the baron; Arrakis is 
rich in melange, a drug and spice that is an addiction for millions of people throughout the galaxy. The 
baron has arranged this trade because he plans to kill Duke Leto and all his family once they are on Arrakis 
by using one of their own people to betray them. Piter trades barbs with his fat master as Feyd-Rautha looks 
on passively.

Back on the planet Caladan, the Reverend Mother Mohiam confronts Jessica and asks her why she did not have a 
girl, in accord with the Bene Gesserit’s orders. Jessica replies that she did so because the duke wanted a son, 
an heir, very badly. The reverend mother chides her, saying that now there is no daughter to wed a Harkonnen, 
the rival house of the Atreides, and “[seal] the breach.” Jessica and the reverend mother both know that the 
planet Arrakis is already lost and that the duke is as good as dead. They talk to Paul, and he recites a dream 
he had in which he met a girl who calls him Usul.

Later, Paul meets Thufir Hawat, the duke’s main strategist, in the training room. Hawat warns Paul of the dangers 
he will face on Arrakis, but he tries to dispel Paul’s fears that his father will be killed. He also mentions the 
Fremen, the native inhabitants of Arrakis. Hawat explains that the Fremen are a tough, resilient people, and they 
will have to be dealt with in some way by the Atreides. After Hawat leaves, Gurney Halleck, the duke’s war master, 
appears and challenges Paul to a training duel. Paul fights well, but Halleck makes the battle difficult for him, 
since he knows that Paul may actually have to fight someone soon. Finally, Paul meets with Dr. Yueh, a doctor of 
the Atreides, who gives him some information about the life-forms on Arrakis—including the planet’s sandworms.